I understand that those 23 people were augmented
by a lot of other people during that summer. Oh, I
know that. And that was the next year. And a lot of
those people I probably never even met, Bob. I
probably never even met them, you know. Yeah, I
know. That was another series of questions here I
wanted to ask you, as a matter of fact. Says,
several candidates join other missions, is a
phrase I found. What other missions? Is there an
Air Force mission? Well, there was a mission on
investigating the chemical industry in Germany.
And there was a mission in investigating the
metallurgical industry, the coke iron and steel
industry. And there were at least a half a dozen, or
perhaps even a dozen, separate groups that came
over later that had nothing to do with the
technical oil mission. But they were all
functioning over there. And did they write
reports too? They wrote reports too. And I don't
know where those reports are. All right, they
also, so what you really have then are a series of
missions going in. A series of missions. And so
there's, hell, I'm just making these names up,
obviously, but a technical mission on metallurgy
in Germany. And there was a technical mission on
such things as the oxygen plants. Okay. And the war
gas plants and the chemical plants and things of
that nature. Everybody got over there, you know.
Did they also touch things on synthetic fuels?
I don't remember ever being involved in any
reports that I have read about synthetic fuels.
Was there an Air Force
team on synthetic fuels? Yes, I believe there was.
Is there a difference between the Air Force
reports and the Tom reports? Well, the Air Force
collected a lot of their own reports.
And I showed you what they had done with the Germans
last time on having the Germans sit down and write
reports. After we had left, they sat down and got
the Germans to write reports. And they obviously
had a team over there, but I don't remember meeting
any of the Air Force people. So we send in, then, in
terms of... Now, I think you've got to look at the
chronology here a little bit, too. Yeah, okay,
good. Because I went over, if I remember
correctly, in December of
1944. Uh-huh.
And I was over there until about June of 1945. The
war had ended in the meantime. But There was a great
deal of work done from June of 1945 by the technical
oil mission and by the other teams such as the Navy
team and the chemical team and the Air Force team
and so on and so forth that I had really no knowledge
of, you see. And that went on. They were over there
for most of the year until the end of the year and
even longer, I think. So they're over there, I
think, all through 45 and 46. Early 46. Yeah,
presumably. OK.
It. It says, why did you bring additional
candidates over in 45? It was the next question I
was to ask, but I assume that you answered that,
that you returned by then. But there seems to be an
influx of new people joining your mission in 45.
Yeah, there were. And I think as we got into
Germany, that more and more industries and more
and more people here in the United States got
interested in the idea of investigating this
German technology as thoroughly as possible. I
think perhaps the technical oil mission and the
Navy mission were the earliest ones over there,
but as it became known throughout the technical
industry that it was possible to get into these
German plants and investigate, more and more
people began to get interested in the thing. So the
thing just spiraled out from a small group to a
bigger and bigger group. I suppose the Germans
must have gotten pretty tired of this after a
while. Why were plant managers not as cooperative
as scientists? Who the hell said that? Did I say
that? Yeah, you said that in the Saturday Evening
Post in 1945. You suggested that plant managers
might not have been as cooperative as scientists.
There are a couple of accounts of material being
hidden away that are searched out in various
places. I think that, I very much, I think probably
that was Ruth Knoll's addition to the article. I
wouldn't, I don't believe I'd substantiate that.
Okay. As a matter of fact, we had, I don't remember,
I don't remember any Germans that weren't
recently cooperative, really. Once or twice we
got into a discussion with people and they got
rather difficult to handle, but it was so seldom
that it was really... I would say almost to no
consequence.
Was much material lost in terms of collecting
material? I know that's a very difficult question
to answer. But you seem to have come back. I'm
afraid to guess how many documents ended back up in
this country. But literally, you're talking
about 450,000 frames of microfilm or so at a
conservative estimate. Is it that much? Oh, got to
be, at least. Yeah. I don't know what all involves.
Let me tell you a little story here that will
probably illustrate what kind of, what happened,
really. You know, we were also interested not only
in collagenation, but the fissure-tropical
process, as you're well aware. And we went to
Stark-Roddy-Holton, where the Rorkeme had a
fissure-tropical plant. And when we got to
Sterk-Rodney Holden,
we went into the plant and we found very few
documents that dealt with the operation of the
plant, the flow sheet for the plant, the
experimental work that they had carried out, the
results of their operations, and so on and so
forth, or exactly how they carried their
operations out. And we talked to a number of people
there, some of which we brought back later on, like
Dr. Alberts and so on and so forth. And we finally
learned that practically all the documents on the
fish and drug process had been removed from the
plants and taken to Magdeburg.
And they were supposed to be in a in Magdeburg.
Well, my German at that time told me that a was a
water castle, but I couldn't figure out just what
the hell he meant by a water castle. It turned out to
be a castle with a moat around it. And so we got
together a group of people. By that time, somehow
we'd got to Frankfurt. And we got together a group
of about six or eight people. And we decided we'd go
down and investigate this castle at Magdeburg. I
think this is described in one of the articles that
you've got. And we did find this castle at
Magdeburg. And in the buildings surrounding it,
it was a castle with a motor on it, of course. And in
the outer buildings around the castle, we found
most of the documents on the official drug
process. And we found a good many slides on the
fish. I'm sorry, I wish I hadn't gone. And things of
that nature. And so
they were literally boxes and boxes of them. And we
went through the boxes one by one, trying to pick
out the material which we thought was important
scientific material. And this stuff, we had a
truck and a driver and so on and so forth. So this
stuff was all loaded into the truck. And there were
literally piles and piles of documents on this, on
the Fisher-Tropsch operations. Now, I'm sure
that material was all taken back to Frankfurt and
was ultimately all microfilmed. But we had only
read it
very scantily, very briefly. And from that, I
don't remember preparing any reports for it, but I
presume that was used to prepare reports on the
facial drug process when it was brought back to the
United States. And that's why you find all these, I
mean, whole truckloads of documents were brought
back, and they were all microfilmed and sent back
to the United States. Hmm, okay. Let me ask some
questions about that while I'm right here. This
seems a logical place to put it, then. I keep
finding an account. And some of these things I
might ought to be able to answer, but I really can't
tell because not being a chemist. 468 documents
are sold from the technical oil mission.
By documents, you mean reports. Must be reports,
right? That must be what it is. Reports and
material, we collect them over there. All right.
And so what that microfilm copies are then, or
those must be microfilm copies of reports plus
addended material, which seemed to back the
reports? Yeah. OK. And this question is not really
for me. It's for Professor Winerdi.
See, in Science Magazine, you were saying the
cream off the top of the German oil production had
been collected. And I suppose that was what you
meant when he asked me about it.
I meant several things by that statement.
Probably I can't give you the full details of what
goes through my mind when you make a statement like
that. But
for example,
I think we brought back enough data. In fact, I know
we brought back enough data. So we were able to
build a 50-barrel-a-day fish and drugs plant in
Louisiana, Missouri. And that was largely on the
basis of the information we collected in Germany
about the plants they operated. Now, we didn't
build that plant exactly like the German plant,
because we had some other ideas we had added into
it. I think we had, in fact, at Louisiana Missouri,
and during our engineering and construction work
out there, had really creamed off the top of what we
knew about the fish treatment process. Now, we
also took all of the documents that we could get
about the fish, about the coalization process,
And they were all taken to Louisiana, Missouri,
all the ones that we thought would be very helpful
to us. And it was on the basis of those documents,
plus such assistance as we had from the German
people we brought over, by which we designed the
collagenation plant at Louisiana, Missouri. And
we made that plant run finally. And it was pretty
much the same type of plant that they had used in
Germany. Now, by the time we had built that plant,
we had a whole lot of new ideas, and we revised the
plant considerably and incorporated a lot of
those new ideas in it. Remember now, we're talking
about 1945 to 1950, when we've got another 10 or 15
years of technology that we can add in to the German
technology to build this plant. And now, even more
than that, there were documents brought back on
processes like the so-called OXO process, in
which you can take an unsaturated hydrocarbon
compound and add CO and hydrogen to it and make
alcohols and ketones and things like that. And
there were several plants built by the oil company
on the basis of that technology. And then the whole
acetylene technology, the Germans are quite a
long ways ahead of us on the acetylene technology,
and the chemical industry picked up the acetylene
technology and went into that in quite a lot of
detail. So what I meant was that industry and the
Bureau of Mines and everybody in the United States
has, in fact, had an awfully good look at this
technology and has, in fact, and is now using that
technology. Do I make myself clear? Sure, you make
yourself clear. What is the Wright-Patterson Is
there a Wright-Patterson system somehow?
Wright-Patterson is the airplane locomotive
engine builders. Yeah. Would they, for example,
have gone back in and looked at the German
technology? I'm sure they did. Well, I'm not sure
of that, but I imagine they had people over there,
and I suppose they were interested in the airplane
engines and the airplane fuels and things of that
nature. Yeah, I guess. I want to figure, what, an
hour and a half later to the airport? Yeah, I'd say
at
least that. I want to ask you some questions about
Louisiana, Missouri plants and problems I had in
trying to decide what happened there. Were there
two plants operating there or one plant? We built
both the fissure troops and the coal
hydrogenation. There were two plants. Two
plants, okay. But they were different size
plants. The coal hydrogenation was 200 barrels a
day, and the fissure troops was 50, about one
quarter of the size. Okay. And did you disassemble
a plant and bring it over? No, no. We built it,
redesigned it, and built it right from scratch.
Okay. Both cases. And you used German plans? Yes.
Modified German plants. Modified German plants,
all right. Now was there already a plant existing
there that you modified? Yeah, there was.
Louisiana, Missouri was producing ammonia.
Okay. And we used the part of the ammonia lines to
make hydrogen. We didn't make our own hydrogen for
our own coal hydrogenation plant. We made the
hydrogen from natural gas. And this is where the
synthetic fuel was produced, which ran, for
example, the terrain. Yeah. It comes out of this
plant. And what did you estimate that a plant, how
much more efficient was this plant than its
comparable German plant? Well, the actual plant
we built probably wasn't much more than 10% or 15%
more efficient than a German plant. But on the
basis of what we learned during its construction
and operating period, We designed a plant which I
think was about double the efficiency of the
German plant.
I assume there's a report where you discuss how
efficient this plant would have been. Yeah, there
is. If I could just put my hand on it right now, I'd
give you a copy. We could make a copy of it. I
probably should have given you...
It's a report by Skinner and Hirsch, as I remember
it.
thermal
efficiency and we came up with something a little
over 55%. The Germans were about 30% and you were
about 55%. This is a various section of the plant.
Hydrogenation proper, improved plant, German
plant, okay. The hydrogenation proper we came up
with about 73 against 51. The hydrogen
manufacturer we came up with. The Germans were
very inefficient in hydrogen manufacturing.
That technology had improved amazingly from 27 to
62. The power plant from 42 to 39. The power plant
actually went down a little bit. Overall
efficiency, 28.9, and this one is 55. I see. And
this is what, in the industrial engineering,
chemistry? You want a copy of it? Yeah. Let me have
the girls make the copy of it for us. It's selling
enough, because the girls are making it. Good.
Now, so all in all, what percentage of synthetic
oil would you say, or what percentage of national
production of fuel did the Germans produce
through synthetic oils?
I don't know. I never calculated it. They produced
about 100,000 barrels a day
They're coal-hygienation plants.
And they had seven fish and trout plants. And I
doubt if those seven fish and trout plants
produced more than 20,000 barrels a day. So we're
talking 120,000 barrels a day. And I don't know
what their total use is. You might be able to... I'm
sure you could look it up for those years or the
years just before the war, something like that.
But... At that time, Bob, we were using about 4
million barrels of oil a day, or 4, 4.5 million
barrels a day. I suspect that the Germans were down
around 1
million barrels a day, or something in that order.
So it's probably something in the order of 10% to
15% of total production. Okay? This is a very rough
figure. Yeah. So it was only really a supplemental
measure, always. Yeah, and of course what they,
there was two things they used this oil for, to a
considerable extent. The coal hydrogenation oil
ran a great deal of their Luftwaffe, because it's a
high-octane gasoline, mostly. And the
fissure-tropical oil they used for a variety of
purposes, but one of the things they used it for was
for diesel fuel. Okay, Mads, thank you very
much. She left a note and
I didn't see it. Yeah. All right, so there are two
plants then. How much time did you spend at the
plant? Plants? At the plants. Did you go to the
plants regularly? When we weren't in London or
trying to get from London to Germany, we were in the
plants. Oh, I'm sorry. I meant the plants in
Louisiana, Missouri. Oh, in Louisiana,
Missouri. Oh, I thought you meant the German
plants. Oh, I used to go out there about...
I guess I was traveling every week. But, see, I had
the Morgantown Laboratory to carry, the Brewston
Laboratory, the Louisiana, Missouri plant, and
the rifle plant. So probably once a month, two or
three days a month was the best I could do at each
place. Okay, now... Did the coppers company build
one of the plants? The coppers company built the
fish and trout plant. But the fish and trout
plants. The Bechtel built the coal hydrogenation
plant. Did Bechtel do a cost analysis of both
plants? No, Bechtel only did a cost analysis of the
coal hydrogenation plant. Okay, that's all
right. And I assume they published that. Yeah,
I've got a copy of it here. Okay. Now that's all
based on 1951 or 1952 figures. Bob, too. And then we
did our own cost analysis of the Fisher-Tropsch
plant. And was yours substantially different
from Bechtel's? Well, we worked with Bechtel on
the analysis of the coal hydrogenation plant. And
so the report that came out from Bechtel was a
Bechtel Bureau of Mines report. Now, later on, we
cooperated with the petroleum industry in a study
of the coal hydrogenation again. And that came out
a little higher than the Bechtel plant, but
substantially in the same region.
Bechtel never analyzed the Fisher Trucks plant.
We did that ourselves. I don't believe we even had
copper samples. We did meet our own cost analysis.
Fisher Trucks? Yeah.
If you ask me where that is published, I'd probably
have a hell of a time picking my fingers up. But, you
know, this series of reports on synthetic fuels,
these annual reports, do have a lot of those cost
studies in it for all three things, oil shale,
fish, trucks, and coal hydrogenation. And those
annual reports now, those are Bureau of Mines
reports? Those are Bureau of Mines reports, yeah.
From 1946 to 1952. Yeah, right, right. I have a few
questions on things that were just sort of vague
towards the end of our interview that I need to have
some information on. I'll make sure I have these.
And again, I have an advantage over you having both
written Tom and having read your interview and you
not. I'm
sorry yours didn't arrive here. It was supposed to
have already been here before I got here.
Now, one of the things you say is that
I think you've answered the question, all kinds of
cost studies have been done. Are you referring to
those in the 1950s and all kinds of cost studies?
But I assume from our conversation, all kinds of
cost studies must have been done since the 1950s.
Oh, yes. Come on in. Thank you very much. MR. Thank
you. Now, will these be summarized in the National
Committee of Engineers report? MR. Only in the
most general terminology,
Bob. The economics in that report is not detailed.
It's very, very, there is so much controversy
about this economics we had really to do a sort of an
overall job to avoid this controversy. And as you
probably know, IRDA has been making cost studies
literally by the dozens since they have been in
operation, and the Office of Cold Research made
cost studies and everything else. Let me read you
what I said about that. Bob, these are really my own
words, and I think the most nearly represents what
I think about the whole damn thing. Although
extensive efforts have been made to accurately
determine capital costs for the most promising
and most highly developed liquefaction
processes, those are really the H coal and the
Exxon process now. The results have shown great
variations, depending not only on the process
selected but also on the many economic and
engineering judgments involved in the
estimates. Furthermore, estimating has been
made much more difficult by the inflation that has
occurred during the last five years, and it is
necessary to talk in terms of ranges rather than
specific figures. Estimates indicate that the
capital cost of the most promising of the coal
liquefaction processes, and I'm not referring to
dry coal hydrogenation, I'm just referring to the
existing processes, to produce a synthetic crude
oil from a plant feeding 25,000 to 50,000 tons of
coal per day will fall...
No, there's an error there, isn't there?
Well, I think they want to check that. Will fall in
the range of $20,000 to $30,000 per barrel per
operating day. And that's about five times what a
petroleum refinery costs.
Well, the cost of product will depend mainly on the
capital and operating costs of the plant. An
additional important factor is the cost of the
coal. With coals priced from 40 to 120 per million
BTUs, that's in the range from about $8 to $25 a ton.
The corresponding cost of synthetic crude is $20
to $30 per barrel. And I think that's too low. I
think it's probably closer to $30 to $40 a barrel,
particularly since this date is a year old now.
Yeah. Harry?
And so you think then $30 to $40 a barrel is more
realistic? Of course, synthetic crude. Of
course, synthetic crude. Okay. Now, you say that
we have, in fact, reviewed every process that is
publicly described for either the fissure tropes
or the cold hydrogenation
process. My tongue has become thick this
afternoon. All right. Now, is this the... Were you
referring to the TOM documents here? No, no, I'm
referring to the Academy of Engineering. To the
Academy of Engineering? Yeah. Okay. All right.
Does that include going back and looking at German
documents? That's out of curiosity. No, because
we felt that the processes now have proceeded
somewhat beyond the German technology. Now...
Is there any way to find out where all the reports
were distributed by Major Green? Do you have any
idea? I remember Major Green. He evidently
distributed. Was he with the Department of
Commerce? Yes.
No, I have no idea, Bob, how you could find that out.
Unless it's in the records of the Department of
Commerce someplace. Well, I can check with them.
And then I somehow or another have come up with five
indexes, which we've spoken of before. going to 1
to 119, then 119 went to 450, and then a last index,
which goes on to 305. And you didn't have anything
to do with putting these indexes together? No. OK.
Then you can't answer my questions on how they
counted documents. I'm trying to arrive at a total
figure of the number of documents brought into
this country, see? And they seem to be scattered
all over the country, and I can't... I'm sure
you're right. You know, I can't seem to find... For
example, there are documents at
Wright-Patterson Air Force Base.
Were those documents I had on coal hydrogenation,
were they from Wright-Patterson?
No, this is a central air documents office. And
that was...
And I don't know what the Air Force did over there.
I've got a few of the things they did, as you see
here, but I have no idea how much work they did.
Well, I...